Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. Philip Jose Farmer has been a mainstay
science fiction writer since 1952. He has written over 40 novels and over 80
short stories focusing on a wide variety of subjects. These range from Tarzan to
the afterlife, from sex-crazed aliens to a star-faring Catholic priest. Farmer's
most famous works are the Riverworld series, the World of Tears series, his
erotic fantasy novels, and the story, later a novel, The Lovers. We asked Farmer
how he started writing science fiction. I started reading science fiction when I
was seven years old. I'm 63 now, and I knew I always wanted to be a writer.
Although I didn't do much about it for many years. The funny thing is, I
actually intended to become a mainstream writer. That is, to write stories which
are not in a particular genre. But I somehow or other just drifted into science
fiction. And sold my first science fiction story in 1952. That was called The
Lovers. It was a novelette, which was published in a magazine. And it's
generally credited with breaking the taboo against the mature use of sex in a
science fiction magazine. We asked Farmer if he consciously set out to break
taboos by writing The Lovers. No, I had an idea for a story, and I couldn't
write it unless I broke the taboos. I didn't really consciously set out to do
it, because I had the idea, and I thought it was terrific. On the other hand, I
knew I was going to have a lot of trouble getting it accepted. I did. Did have a
lot of trouble. The first editor I sent it to, John Campbell, who was the editor
of Astounding, was the most prestigious and highest paying market. So naturally,
I sent it to him first. And he returned it with a comment that nauseated him. So
I sent it to Horace Gold, who was editing Galaxy, which was equally prestigious
and had about the same word rate. His comments were something like John
Campbell's. So then I sent it to Samuel Mines, who was editor of a magazine
called Startling Stories. And he immediately accepted it and knew it was a
revolutionary breakthrough. I published it, and I was on my way. Except that the
next story I wrote was also equally revolutionary, and it took me a year before
I could get anybody to accept it. Farmer is also interested in religion in its
varied forms, and has used it in his works. My interest in religion has
manifested itself throughout all my works. Although a lot of people, when they
say the name Farmer, immediately think of sex in the book. But the fact is I've
written much more about religion than about sex. Or sometimes both at the same
time. But in some respects, sex and religion are two sides of the same coin. In
certain fields of activity.
But religion is only one of many themes. Farmer feels that he may have labored
in relative anonymity for years because his writings are so varied. But he has
his reasons. One of the reasons I've had trouble in the early days, I think,
really becoming identified and getting a band of followers, is that I didn't
beat on just one or two drums. I ranged all over the field. But I find out that
if I do a variety of stuff, I don't get tired. Each new novel is a new
challenge. I'm not just working the same old theme again. Tomorrow we continue
with more on Philip Jose Farmer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. We're continuing our interview with Philip
Jose Farmer. We want to explore here some background related to one of
Farmer's major themes, religion. As Farmer allowed earlier, he considers himself
a writer of religious themes, even more so than a writer of sexual themes. His
own religious background is quite checkered. I was sent to Sunday school when I
was very little, and I became interested in the Bible, and I read it on my own.
And I even read the Book of Mormon when I was about nine years old. And I always
wrestled all my life with the problems of immortality, predestination, grace,
the afterlife, and all that sort of stuff. I was raised as a Christian scientist
up until the time I was about 12. And then I was sent to a Presbyterian church
where
there was a conflict between Christian science and the Presbyterian idea of
predestination. And then when I was about 16, I guess I became an atheist. I've
gone through atheism through agnosticism, and then I was converted to the
disciples of Christ. And then I backslid myself from grace, as the theological
term goes. And then I lapsed back into agnosticism. And what are Farmer's
present beliefs? My present situation is that without immortality, life has no
meaning. And if there's a creation, there must be a creator. But I've become
tremendously interested in what is sometimes referred to as mythicism. It isn't
really like the Muslim Sufism. It's cool. Then a lot of related stuff like that.
You might say right now I'm in sort of a limbo. Heading toward something, I
don't know what. The concept of an afterlife appears repeatedly in Farmer's
works. Well, if you think about it, there could be a million different
possibilities in an afterlife if there were work. But one of my perhaps unstated
themes is that immortality may not depend upon a supernatural being. That it's
in the evolutionary drive of man for him to invent immortality himself.
The drawback to that is that those people who are already dead will remain dead,
right? So that doesn't correspond to the religious idea of immortality, where
everybody is raised. From the first human being to the last one. I like to do a
lot of variations on that. I have a new book called The Unreasoning Mask. That's
a quotation from Moby Dick. And this is concerned with theology, afterlife,
immortality. You might call it a philosophical-theological space opera.
Many of Farmer's first works had the central theme of religion. The Lovers and A
Woman a Day deal with a future amalgamation of church and state called the
Sturch. A popular character, Father John Carmody, is a planet-hopping Catholic
priest who has appeared in several short stories. We learn about his former life
and conversion in the excellent novel, Night of Light. Inside Outside is a wild
tale about the afterlife and immortality. It is in fact the predecessor to the
famous Riverworld series, which we will discuss in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. Having looked into Philip Jose Farmer's
feelings on religion and immortality, we began a look today at the Riverworld
series. Farmer explains the basis of the story. It concerns the planet in which
there is a 10 million mile long river, which follows the valley. And everybody
that lived from about 150,000 B.C. to about 1983 A.D. was resurrected along the
banks of the river in rejuvenated form. It looks like there were 25. And the
main mystery behind the whole thing was, why were all these people resurrected?
Who did it and how? But the Riverworld concept is so big that Farmer has
managed only to scratch the surface in the four main novels of the series. There
are so many themes that I wanted to explore during the course of those four
novels, but I couldn't do it because I would have slowed the story down too
much. It would have taken too many sidetracks, you might say, and I'd still be
working on that particular series. What else is left? Listen to Farmer as he
gives us an inkling of what he would like to cover. I didn't go into any detail
in how you could work out viable societies with people from every place and
every time. I also wanted to bring up in depth what would happen to famous
people on that planet. Like, well, there's Karl Marx, for instance. What would
he think of what happened to his ideas about communism on the planet Earth after
he died? Leonardo da Vinci, his ideas about art, plus the fact that he's on a
planet where there are very few pigments available, for instance, for him to
paint. What would he do there?
I also wanted to bring
up various figures from science and the military and philosophy and so forth to
show what they would do there. Now, one of the things about the river world was
that although you were resurrected there in a youthful body of your own, as it
was at 25 or earlier, if you died before 25, if, for instance, you were 83 when
you died, and your mind is still 83 and you have 83 years of experience on Earth
behind you, now, is your character formed? Are you going to go through perhaps a
thousand years being the same person? Or are you going to improve? And is the
magic labyrinth the last word on the river world? I made a lot of people mad at
me. Because of that last sentence there, your paragraph, I should say, that I
wrote in the magic labyrinth, everything seems to have been settled. Everything
has been cleared up. And then one of the characters, the kind of minor one,
Peter Jairus Frigate, he's celebrating with the others in the misty tar, when
he thinks he hears a football outside in the hallway. Close out, comes back, and
says to the others, I didn't see anyone. It must have been my imagination. A lot
of readers got mad at me because they thought, oh no, he's going to write
another one. He's leaving a loophole. Well, I am leaving a loophole. And I don't
know whether I'll go through it or not. But it's quite possible that the magic
labyrinth wasn't the final one in that series before. Everything that our
protagonist learned, and everything that everybody else learned, is completely
untrue or has to true. So the Riverworld novels may or may not be finished, but
we do have some more sidestream stories to anticipate. More on Farmer tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Crews. Our show today continues the
discussion with Philip Jose Farmer. A major incident in Farmer's career began
when Venus on the Half Shell, a novel written under the pseudonym Kilgore Trout,
appeared in the pages of fantasy and science fiction in late 74, early 75. Of
course, Kilgore Trout is the creation of author Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. The character
Trout is an impoverished, underappreciated science fiction writer who appears in
a number of Vonnegut's novels. We asked Farmer if he identifies with Kilgore
Trout. I was a fan of Vonnegut. I liked all his books, but Kilgore Trout really
turned me on because his early experiences, as a matter of fact his later ones
too, were like a lot of my early experiences, and a lot like the experiences of
many other science fiction writers. Back in the old days when they weren't being
paid much, and science fiction was looked down upon, and we were being taken due
to our inexperience by various publishers and agents. Also, I had a tough time
getting any recognition. So, I guess that's why I identified with him. Plus the
fact he's a great character. Vonnegut did not appreciate the reviews given Venus
on the Half Shell, either pro or con, because most of the reviewers approached
the work as if Vonnegut were the author. This cost Farmer the opportunity to
write another novel under the Kilgore Trout pseudonym. I don't know what his
reactions are to the novel itself, but so many people thought that he'd written
it, that he was deluded, hundreds of maybe thousands of questions, and then the
reviews came out. Some said Venus on the Half Shell by Kilgore Trout. Well, it
was the worst thing he'd written, and others said it was the best thing he'd
ever written. So, when I applied for permission to write The Son of Jimmy
Valentine, which I really would have loved to have done, because I could have
had a lot of fun with it, he said no, which is his prerogative. We asked if The
Son of Jimmy Valentine was Kilgore Trout's one erotic novel. It was not only his
one and only specifically erotic book, it was also his only non-science fiction
book. Farmer obviously enjoys writing about fictional authors, who in turn write
about their own fictional authors, and so on. Listen as he describes what
writing as Kilgore Trout started. In The Venus on the Half Shell, the
protagonist, Simon Wagstaff, had his favorite science fiction author. Just as in
the Vonnegut books, Eliot Rosewater thought that Kilgore Trout was the greatest
living writer in any field. He should have been president of the U.S. He
couldn't solve all the problems. Well, anyway, in The Venus on the Half Shell,
Simon Wagstaff liked to read the science fiction works of a fellow called
Jonathan Swift Somers III. And I described his various works, or outline them,
as a title. But Jonathan Swift Somers, who's a fiction author, wrote about a
giant German Shepherd police dog whose IQ had been raised to about 200 in a
laboratory, and he became a private detective. Now, I plan eventually someday on
writing a book by Ralph von Valvao, the dog, under the name of Ralph von Valvao.
And then maybe I'll end the cycle by having Ralph von Valvao write about a human
named Vonnegut, something like that, and completing it, going right back to
Vonnegut again. Farmer conceived of the extended family group called the Wold
-Newton family, in which many great historical and fictional characters are
descended from the Scarlet Pimpernel. Thus, Kilgore Trout is related to Sherlock
Holmes, Doc Savage, Sam Spade, and James Bond, among others. We will look into
this aspect of Farmer's writing some more tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. This show will conclude our interview with
Philip Jose Farmer. Yesterday, we discussed Farmer's penchant for writing under
pseudonyms. As it turns out, this practice has a very desirable side effect.
But when they sit down in front of the typewriter, nothing happened. Well, that
happened to me once. I never thought it would. I thought I was immune to such a
thing. But it did. And after wrestling for two months and getting no place, I
had an idea. I sat down with the typewriter and wrote a story, not by Philip
Jose Farmer, but by David Copperfield, they say. I don't remember which
particular nominacy. The story poured out. Very good. I thought so, anyway. When
I completed that, the writing block was gone. See, I wasn't writing then as me,
so both a Farmer, but as a Kilgore Trout. And I was in his shoes. I had no
trouble. Now, the funny thing about this is that the, uh, it's a psychological
trick that I'm conscious of, see. And yet it works. It's not like I'm trying to
trick my unconscious, but I must be doing it one way or another. Well, I don't
know if anybody else has ever broken the writer's block in that manner. But I
recommend trying it. Farmer has also written several books featuring Tarzan or
Tarzan-like characters. Tarzan Alive is Tarzan's biography. The erotic novel A
Feast Unknown and its clean sequels The Mad Goblin and Lord of the Trees feature
thinly veiled versions of Tarzan and Doc Savage. Lord Tiger, the Opar books, and
The Adventures of the Peerless Peer also have Tarzan-like protagonists. We asked
Farmer when he developed his interest in Tarzan. I first read Tarzan when I
guess I was about seven or eight years old, and I became wrapped up in that
early age with the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs.
And, but when I started college, I kind of lost interest and didn't read them
anymore.
But later, Farmer picked up on Tarzan again. This time, he saw Tarzan in a
different light. I started reading books about Tarzan again, and this time,
although I still kept a lot of my childhood interest in him, a sense of wonder
about him, I began seeing things in Tarzan, for instance, that I had not seen
before. Tarzan was not just a child who'd been cast away and raised by great
apes and then become a creature of the jungle, then returned to claim fortune.
And he was sort of an archetype of many, many heroes from classical myths. And
now, I'm sure that when Burroughs wrote this, he didn't know what he was doing,
but he did it unconsciously. I think that the creation of Tarzan is a stroke of
genius. Burroughs is not a great writer, but he has created a great character,
just like Acorn and Doyle is not a great writer, but he created a great
character. Sherlock Holmes. Philip Jose Farmer. An author with a seemingly
endless supply of unique ideas, who appears just now to be gaining widespread
acceptance.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.